Following a raid on the tower of a sorcerer, a Skaven grey seer named Thanquol discovers that a crystal in their possession is actually a piece of a runic crystal that can power an ancient elven artifact known as the Menhir, allowing it to channel magic wherever one directs it. Seeking to use it to conquer the Old World, Thanquol launches a search for the other pieces, while creating a specially enchanted axe that allows him to manipulate an Orc warboss named Urgat Rip-Eye into launching raids against the humans and dwarves in order to weaken them and divert their attention. At the same time, Thanquol orders a hunt for an elf named Ceridan, who could impede Thanquol's plans by warning others of the encroaching danger.

Whilst working within the Border Princes, Morgan Bernhardt, commander of the "Grudgebringer" mercenaries, is approached by Sven Carlsson, one of the aforementioned princes, who contracts him into capturing a rogue border prince working with the Skaven. However, the Skaven kill the prince and then attack Carlsson's hometown while the mercenaries conduct a patrol for him, capturing his adviser Ilmarin. Bernhardt manages to rescue him along with a dwarven regiment seeking to warn their king of increased Skaven activity, only to learn that Ilmarin is, in reality, Ceridan, a ranger from the Black Mountains, who has become increasingly concerned with the Skaven activity and requests the need to go to Loren Forest. Upon learning that Carlsson was captured by orcs, Ceridan requests Bernhardt's aid to rescue him.

Following his success, Bernhardt does what he can to combat the raids by the orcs in the Border Princes, while learning that the dwarven fortress of Zhufbar has come under attack from Skaven and orc forces. Eventually, he and Ceridan find themselves forced to travel to Zhufbar, whereupon the mercenaries become involved in helping with the dwarves' defence of the fortress. When the sceptre belonging to King Ungrunn, ruler of Zhufbar, is stolen by the Skaven, Ceridan reveals himself as a descendant of the ancient elves who created the Menhir, during the war between the elves and dwarves, explaining that the Skaven are seeking to find its location at the ruins of Ulthuan and use it. Concerned with the Menhir's power, despite knowing the Skaven must not find it, Ungrunn contracts Bernhardt to escort an envoy of his to the city of Nuln in order to meet with Emperor Karl Franz and request his aid in combating the Skaven's plot; in addition, he also provides a regiment of dwarves to help him, with the secret intention that they destroy the Menhir upon it being located.

Upon arriving in Nuln, Bernhardt and Ceridan meet with Franz and relay what they know about the Skaven's plot. After initially deciding to deliberate the matter with his council, Franz decides to provide aid upon learning that the pair intend to continue towards Loren without waiting for his response. After escorting Ungrunn's envoy to a dwarven fort in the Grey Mountains, the mercenaries finally make it to Loren and assist the elves within the wood against Skaven attacks. However, Thanquol finally finds the remaining piece of the crystal and with it, locates Ulthuan. Realising that the Menhir has been located, Ceridan advises Bernhardt to journey to the elven ruins, guiding the army with the runic crystal's sister stone embedded in his family's sword. While en route back to Nuln, Bernhardt's mercenaries defeat a large orc army, killing Urgat during the battle. Upon reaching Ulthan, the army encounters more Skaven, and launch an assault to stop them using the Menhir.

If the player fails to retake the Menhir in the final battle, Thanquol channels the artifact to make him into a powerful Skaven entity called the Horned Rat, which begins attacking the Empire and bringing destruction and chaos across the Old World. If the player lets the dwarves destroy the Menhir while defeating the Skaven, Ceridan considers the action as unjustified, citing that the dwarves were ignorant of what the artifact could do, and thus vowing that the elves will seek revenge for what they did. If the player lets the elves secure the Menhir while defeating the Skaven, Ceridan forces the dwarves to leave the artifact alone and let it be protected by the elves, before Bernhardt returns with him to Nuln to receive a hero's welcome for foiling the Skaven plot.